# CS216 – Software Development


**Programming Assignment P1 IPO Steps**
**30 points**  
**Due: 5:00 pm, Wednesday, Jaunary 21, 2026** 

---

## Overview

Many “experts” recommend taking **10,000 steps each day**. An exercise science instructor would like an application that calculates the **number of miles walked** given the number of steps taken and the length of stride in inches.

Write a **Python** program that inputs the number of steps taken and the stride length in inches.  Calculates the miles walked and dispays the number of steps over or under 10,000 as shown in the sample program runs.


---

## Program Requirements

Your program must:

1. Input the number of steps taken as an integer.
2. Input the stride length in inches as an integer.
3. Calculate the number of miles walked.
4. Calculate the number of steps over or under 10,000
5. Display the number of miles walked **formatted to two decimal places** as shown.
6. Display the number of steps over or under 10,000 as shown.

- add comments to program header that include the program name, date, your name, and a description
- add comments for input, processing, and output sections

---

### Miles Ouput
The format of the output message **must match exactly as shown**:

```text
You walked 5,000 steps which is 1.87 miles
```

---

### Step Count Output

Your program must also display **one** of the following messages depending on the number of steps.
The format of the output message **must match exactly as shown**:

* **If the number of steps is less than 10,000**

  ```text
  You need 9,999 more steps to reach 10,000
  ```

* **If the number of steps is greater than 10,000**

  ```text
  You were 3,000 steps over 10,000
  ```

* **If the number of steps is exactly 10,000**

  ```text
  You walked exactly 10,000 steps
  ```

---

### Input Notes

To allow for automated test cases, print the input message *before* reading the value, as shown in the following example:

**Use this approach for input**
```python
print("Enter int value: ")
value = int(input())
```

**Do Not use an integrated approach for intput**
```python
value = int( input("Enter int value: ") )
```

---

## Planning Requirements

### 1. IPO Chart

Create an **Input–Processing–Output (IPO)** chart to plan your program.


### 2. Sample Calculations

Create **four sample calculations by hand** to test your program.

See [sample planning document](planning.md). You may use this form or create your own.

---

## Sample Output

### Sample 1. When input is:

```
3000
28
```

### Output:

```
Enter number of steps
Enter stride distance in inches
You walked 3,000 steps which is 1.33 miles
You need 7,000 more steps to reach 10,000
```

---

### Sample 2. When input is:

```
12500
28
```

### Output:

```
Enter number of steps
Enter stride distance in inches
You walked 12,500 steps which is 5.52 miles
You were 2,500 steps over 10,000
```

---

### Sample 3. When input is:

```
10000
28
```

### Output:

```
Enter number of steps
Enter stride distance in inches
You walked 10,000 steps which is 4.42 miles
You walked exactly 10,000 steps
```

---

## Code Template
```python

#      program:
#         date:
#       author:
#  description:

# input


# processing


# output

```

---
## Grading (30 Points Total)

- IPO planning (4 points)
- Sample calculations (4 points)
- required comments (2 points)
- readability and organization (white space) (1 points)
- input (4 points)
- calculations (3 points)
- miles output (3 points)
- steps output (9 points)

---

## Automated Test Cases

A sample automated test case program `p1_test_cases.py` that includes x6 sample
test cases is provided. Students are encouraged to test their code with this program.

> note: place `p1.py` and `p1_test_cases.py` in the same folder when testing

Students are encouraged to add their own test cases.


## Submitting your assignment

Your program must be called `p1.py`

Host `p1.py` on your GitHub account and upload a link to your code in Moodle.

Submit paper copies of your **IPO chart** and **x4 Sample Test Cases** to Prof. Lehman (in class, or outside office SH 182)


-- end --


